---
layout: post
title:  "Low Waste Travel"
date:   2019-10-07 14:51:13 
---
I embarked on this trip to Asia with great intentions of not leaving a trail of plastic waste in my wake. But I have to admit it has been harder than I had hoped. As my first solo trip, often trying to navigate a menu in a foreign language, with food I have never seen before and can’t imagine very well, along with the excitement of trying something new, is a huge distraction. In the midst of this, I have often forgotten to order my drink without a straw, and sometimes in shops, I look away for a second, and by the time I turn back my things are in a plastic bag. One thing I have noticed, especially in Malaysia (I also travelled in Sri Lanka), is that people WANT to give you lots of plastic - plastic is an added luxury, whether it be in the form of a straw, or a gift bag. On the occasions where I have remembered to ask to have no straw, I have got some funny looks, but always been successful. In a Malaysian bakery, though, I had to be really quite insistent in order to reduce the multiple plastic bags my pastries were being wrapped in. The easiest times are when I can brandish my own straw, or bag, to demonstrate that I really don’t need it. Aside from people looking a bit confused, I have generally had a perfectly positive reaction, and on most occasions, when I ask for no bag, or no straw, it is completely fine.

I have also noticed that quite a few cafes have policies where straws are given on request only, or reusable straws are used for drinks. This is a good sign in my eyes, as it is a simple thing, but just the fact that places are acknowledging care of the environment is a step in the right direction, in places where almost everything seems to be made from plastic. I also noticed a lot of locals with reusable water bottles, which was a pleasant surprise, as I had been under the impression that bottled water was the norm where tap water isn’t safe to drink. One issue I have faced with bottled water, is that although I have a Grayl Geopress, sometimes on a long journey or a hike, 750ml just isn’t enough, so I have had to buy a few big bottles of water on this trip. I try to see it as a balance though, between my health and happiness, and caring for the environment. I could be using a lot more plastic bottles, so I allow myself to buy one when I need the bigger bottle, and then I refill it in hostels for as long as it lasts. This is still a positive contribution. In a country where I can’t get clean water out the tap, using one plastic bottle a week is a good effort. 

The Grayl Geopress has been an indispensable travel companion to reduce my plastic waste. Any time a hostel doesn’t have a water dispenser, I just use the tap, and in two months, I haven’t had any issues with it. It is easy to use, and the water has obviously been properly filtered, as I haven’t had any issues. I will admit, the first time I filled it, I was a bit apprehensive, and I have only tried it with tap water, and nothing dodgy looking, but after having such a great experience, I would go so far as to filter water from a natural source like a river with no concerns. The other thing I feel we have to consider as low impact travellers, is that the way we eat is different. In the UK, I still buy a fair amount of packaged food, whether that be snacks, tins or the occasional take away dinner, and any items I have to buy in a supermarket come in plastic packaging. While in Asia, I eat all my meals in cafes and restaurants, it is extremely rare that I buy takeaway, and I don’t buy that many packaged snacks or processed foods, tending to buy fruit to snack on. This means that my food is mostly local and seasonal, fresh and unpackaged, so it doesn’t have the same environmental impact as a lot of what I eat at home. It is also nice to support local small businesses in this way.
