---
layout: post
title:  "Elephant Conservation in Sri Lanka"
date:   2019-06-21 14:51:13 
---

It is notoriously difficult to find an elephant volunteer project that is guaranteed to be ethical, but after a lot of research, I discovered the Sri Lanka Wildlife Conservation Society. They are an organisation that work to reduce elephant-human conflict, which arises due to the growing human population moving into areas where wild elephants are already living. Working on a project like this was a great start to my low impact travel journey, as it really incorporated everything low impact travel is about. I felt my money was going towards a genuinely worthwhile cause, and living in basic shared accomodation, where we ate communal meals and had cold showers, meant the environmental impact of hosting volunteers was massively reduced. As the project is focused on conserving wild animal populations, I didn't have to be concerend that the "rescued" elephants were being used inappropriately for tourism. Working closely with the community also gave me the opportunity to learn so much about Sri Lankan culture, and to interact with local people. Living at the project brought to light for me how living simply can reduce your environmental impact by so much. Using local ingredients, or eating foods that use similar ingredients so that nothing goes to waste, and creating a home with only the things you really care about, can have such a huge positive effect. The whole experience showed me that it's possible to be happy with very little, but to really see this, you have to try! If you start with nothing and only bring in what you love, happiness is sure to follow. Being constantly surrounded by beautiful nature and animals, and lovely people, I found I didn't need many material things to be fulfilled and to keep busy. It is so important to disconnect from everyday life, which, even though I often don't realise it, can be fast-paced and chaotic, and doing a project like this is a great way to channel that need for space into a positive cause.

Unfotunately, elephants are still used in the tourist industry in Sri Lanka, and nothing prepares you for the sight of an elephant being led up the street, its ankles chained together, with a grinning tourist on its back. These elephants are magnificent creatures, but their eyes are dead and they look thoroughly miserable. Their spines are not built to bear the weight of someone riding them, and this constant pressure damages the spine and causes them extreme pain. The issue of animal welfare here is so much more striking when you have seen a herd of elephants in the wild only the day before. The difference could not be more extreme. Luckily, in Sri Lanka it is illegal to capture wild elephants, increasing the liklihood that elephants will remain free from the pain of a life in captivity, but we still need to think of those who are already domesticated. These elephants could not survive in the wild, but deserve a life of dignity, free from boredom and pain. They are often used for religious parades and festivals, where they are transported long distances with no concern for their well-being, and tied up in horrible conditions for the duration of the event, while they are not being used. They are uncomfortable and often scared, having no idea what is happening.

While elephants are fascinating creatures and a beautiful sight, we need to be careful about how we choose to catch a glimpse of one. Sri Lanka has many national parks, where you can see elephants living in the wild, with space to roam freely and live in their natural environment with a family group. This, or volunteering with an ethical project, is the best way to see an elephant. This is the only way to see a happy elephant, and to ensure we are not contributing to their pain and suffering. Just like we wouldn't go to a circus with elephants in it in the UK, why should we pay to ride them, wash them, feed them, or watch them in a parade, just because we are in another country. 
