---
layout: post
title:  "Getting off the beaten track"
date:   2019-11-09
---

Travelling in Southeast Asia, I have had to contend with the desire to do all the fun backpacker activities that are considered to be an essential part of a solo trip in this part of the world, and the desire to travel in a low impact way, because as I’ve travelled, I have discovered that these two things don’t always work together very well. In Vang Vieng, of course I wanted to go river tubing, and I did. But while I was only really interested in floating peacefully down the Mekong for a few hours, it’s impossible to avoid the way the activity is organised. There are bars at the side of the river, and they all play extremely loud party music. At one of these bars, I noticed a local sitting on the opposite bank by his boat, and as people around me played beer pong without a care in the world, I couldn’t help but think; how would I feel if this was my home, and I wanted to sit by the river, or I needed to fish to feed my family, and this was going on around me? Vang Vieng has been overrun with tourism, becoming a “backpacker town”, where even without having read the stats, you can see that tourists outnumber locals by a ridiculous proportion; but people still live there. They have to live with topless tourists drinking too much and polluting the peaceful landscape with all this noise and bad behaviour. So, with hindsight, as much as I loved floating down the river, I would not go tubing in Vang Vieng again. In fact, I might not go at all. I’m sure there are other places in the world where you can swim in blue lagoons, and float down a river in a tube. This brings me to my thoughts on getting off the beaten track.

Of course tourism can be great for a local economy, bringing money and jobs, and improving the quality of life for the locals. Right now, I think this is evident in a village like Muang Ngoy, a Lao village that sees plenty of tourists and who’s riverbank is lined with guesthouses and restaurants, but which still has one dirt track as its main street, and no road access. If tourism increases here, it will begin to have the negative impact I witnessed in Vang Vieng, crowding out the locals and fuelling overconsumption, which is damaging to both the planet and the local culture. Comparing Muang Ngoy to Vang Vieng, the former still retains a strong Lao character, while Vang Vieng could just be a Southeast Asian themed amusement park. This is the line I feel we should be careful not to cross, and perhaps one way to minimise our contribution to the slippery slope, is to seek out new destinations that are not overcrowded, and to visit them in a way that has positive impact, engaging only in activities that benefit the community, without supporting those that are damaging to the environment, or offensive to the local culture and way of life.

