---
layout: post
title:  "Ethical Eating"
date:   2020-08-01 
---

The vegan diet has got a lot of attention in the last few years, for being a more environmentally sustainable choice than a meat based diet. But it’s important to consider other factors in what makes a diet ethical and sustainable. It is possible to eat a diet that contains meat and dairy, and still be eating more sustainably than a vegan person. One factor is how the food is produced; for example factory farmed meat is in my opinion, and I think in many people’s, without a doubt the most horrific thing to eat in terms of ethics, considering animal welfare, the environment, and working conditions. But on the other end of the spectrum, completely organic meat from a farm with high standards of animal welfare can be a justified choice if eaten infrequently. If on a vegan diet, everything you buy is processed and packaged in plastic, or shipped from far off countries, this could easily be creating a higher negative environmental impact than someone who consumes meat once a week, provided it’s produced with ethics in mind. And this is the foundation for an ethical diet: it should have the minimum negative impact when combining animal welfare, human welfare, carbon emissions, damage to land and water, plastic pollution, other waste, and support of unethical practices. And that does not mean that a vegan diet is automatically better than a diet containing animal products.

One thing about this way of eating, is that it takes us back to diets from before the agricultural boom and the growth of processed foods, globalisation and access to foreign products, and a general abundance of cheap food. Whether in the times of hunter gatherers, or going back only a couple of generations, people understood the true value of food. It took a lot of resources to obtain meat, so it was more expensive and people ate it less often. It was a luxury. The same goes for bananas, a staple in any healthy diet in the UK these days, but something that was non-existent in the diets of my grandparents when they were children, because to ship bananas halfway across the world without modern technology was just not a viable option. A banana would have been considered a real exotic thing, a rarity and something to be cherished. With easy access to an abundance of cheap food from all around the world, we in the west have forgotten the real value of our food, and disregarded the people who grow it for us and the resources it takes to deliver it to our door. We have replaced this true value with supermarket prices, regarding bananas as a cheap commodity, buying them at £1 for 5, or even less, and grabbing beef burgers for 99p at Macdonald’s. Of course it would be nice if everyone could have access to any food they wanted, and this is what has fuelled the free market, but at what cost has this come to pass? The cheap meat that has brought about the cultural shift from meat once a week, to meat 3 times a day, is just bad quality. It would be far better for the planet, and our own health, if we accepted that some things are naturally too high value for us to afford, and we chose to eat other products that can be provided at a lower price, maintaining high quality, and not having such a negative impact.

An ethical diet takes this into account, choosing local, seasonal, high quality produce, and balancing the diet with the more naturally abundant items in greater quantities. Buying food that is produced locally cuts down on carbon emissions, and it also helps create a local food network, where farmers are supported, and people understand better where their food comes from, which is key to eating a better diet. Fruit and veg that’s grown locally and in season also often tastes better and retains more nutrients because it ripens naturally rather than being picked unripe and ripened artificially later. Out of season food has to be shipped from abroad or grown under resource intensive artificial conditions, which both create much higher emissions, and increase the cost. Higher quality in food is achieved through more ethical farming practices, like increased animal welfare, and organic farming methods, which helps protect the environment, and tends to result in the end price reflecting the resources needed. A couple of other important things to consider in eating an ethical diet, are food waste, packaging waste, and supporting organisations doing good. If you can, try to buy from smaller local businesses that are engaging with better farming practices, or trying to fight food waste, as the more we support these producers, the bigger the movement for sustainable food production will become. Support organisations that are offering wonky veg boxes or making products out of surplus food - often this does mean eating things like bananas and mangos, because they arrive in the UK perfectly usable but wonky or overripe. Buying the wonky range from your supermarket is good too, as is just selecting the wonkier looking items from the loose produce section, as these are more likely not to be picked and go to waste. Buying the wonky range shows your support for wonky produce and makes a statement that you don’t require a bag of perfect looking carrots. If enough people engage with this, we can fight the practice of rejecting anything that doesn’t look unnaturally symmetrical. Try to go to farmers markets and bulk shops, or order a veg box, to cut down on the amount of packaging your food is wrapped in, and focus your diet more on plant-based wholefoods, as these are easier to find unpackaged, and have a lower environmental impact overall. 

Of course it’s hard to eat an entirely organic, locally produced and unpackaged diet. It would unfortunately be inordinately expensive, and probably not that enjoyable. But through a combination of all the factors I’ve discussed here, we can certainly approach a more ethical diet, and work to change the food system so that it becomes easier and easier to access ethical and sustainable food at fair prices. 
